OSDOCS-19151 [NETOBSERV] 1.12 Enable TLS tracking via NetObserv Operator (#110804)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/network-observability-analyze-tls-traffic.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="analyzing-tls-traffic_{context}"]
= Analyzing TLS traffic data

[role="_abstract"]
View and filter TLS metadata to identify deprecated configurations and verify encryption compliance in the cluster.

.Prerequisites

* TLS tracking is enabled in the `FlowCollector` custom resource (CR).
* TLS-encrypted traffic is present in the cluster.
* Access to the {product-title} web console.

.Procedure

. Navigate to *Observe* → *Network Traffic* in the {product-title} web console.

. Add TLS-specific columns to the traffic table:

.. Click *Manage columns*.

.. Select the following TLS columns:
* *TLS Version*
* *TLS Cipher Suite*
* *TLS Curve*
* *TLS Types*

.. Click *Save*.
+
[NOTE]
====
If the TLS columns are not visible after enabling TLS tracking, click *Restore default columns* to refresh the list.
====

. Filter traffic to view TLS metadata:

.. In the filter bar, select *TLS Types*.

.. Select *ServerHello* from the dropdown menu.
+
This filters the view to show only `ServerHello` messages, which contain negotiated TLS metadata such as cipher suite and curve information.

. Analyze TLS metrics in the overview panel:

> .. Scroll to the *Overview* section.

Reviewer: This is still InProgress(so not tested it yet to verify if the info is accurate) 
Will be implemented in https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/NETOBSERV-2608

Author: Excellent. I'll leave this conversation open and keep an eye on NETOBSERV-2608. Thank you!

Reviewer 2: it's ready now

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * observability/network_observability/network-observability-monitoring-tls-traffic.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE

> [id="analyzing-tls-traffic_{context}"]

Reviewer 3: Ideally ID tags and filenames should match to make for easier xrefs. I've often ran into issues because of the differences and the workarounds.

= Analyze Transport Layer Security traffic data

[role="_abstract"]
View and filter Transport Layer Security (TLS) metadata to identify deprecated configurations and verify encryption compliance in the cluster.

.Prerequisites

> * TLS tracking is enabled in the `FlowCollector` custom resource (CR).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* You have an active `FlowCollector` custom resource (CR).
```
are you saying that we have to have this CR already?

Author: If NOO is installed, there is a `FlowCollector` custom resource already. Users have to specifically configure the `FlowCollector` for TLS tracking. If they don't want TLS tracking, then they do nothing and can skip over this doc set.

> * You have access to the {product-title} web console.

Reviewer 4: at what RBAC level?

Author: All. As long as a user can access the OCP web console, they can see/analyze traffic.

.Procedure

. Navigate to *Observe* -> *Network Traffic* in the {product-title} web console and click the *Traffic flows* tab.
+
[NOTE]
====

> The *TLS Version* column is enabled by default. If the default TLS version column is not visible after enabling TLS tracking, click *Restore default columns* to refresh the table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *TLS Version* column is enabled by default. If the default TLS version column is not visible after enabling TLS tracking, click *Restore default columns* in *Manage columns* to refresh the table.
```

====

. Add TLS-specific columns to the traffic table:
.. Click *Manage columns*.
.. Select the *TLS Cipher Suite*, *TLS Group*, and *TLS Types* checkboxes.
.. Click *Save*.

. Filter traffic by message type to view complete TLS metadata:
.. In the filter bar, select *TLS Types* and choose *ServerHello* from the dropdown menu.
+
`ServerHello` messages contain negotiated TLS metadata such as cipher suite and cryptographic group information.

. Filter traffic by TLS version to identify deprecated configurations:
.. In the filter bar, select *TLS Version*.
.. Select the versions you want to review:
* *1.0*: Deprecated
* *1.1*: Deprecated
* *1.2*: Legacy
* *1.3*: Current standard
+
To identify all deprecated connections, filter for TLS versions 1.0 and 1.1.

. Analyze TLS metrics in the overview panel:
.. Click the *Overview* tab.
.. Review the default TLS panels, which include *TLS usage (network flows per second)* and *TLS per version (network flows per second)*.

> .. Optional: To view additional TLS metrics, click *Manage panels* to select and display additional panels, such as *TLS per group (network flows per second)* or *TLS per cipher suite (network flows per second)*.

Reviewer 4: do the menu items actually include the parenthetical information?

Author: Yes.

. Filter traffic by TLS version to identify deprecated configurations:
.. In the filter bar, select *TLS Version*.
.. Select the versions you want to review:
* *1.0*: Deprecated
* *1.1*: Deprecated
* *1.2*: Legacy
* *1.3*: Current standard
+
To identify all deprecated connections, filter for TLS versions 1.0 and 1.1.

. Analyze TLS metrics in the overview panel:
.. Click the *Overview* tab.
.. Review the default TLS panels, which include *TLS usage (network flows per second)* and *TLS per version (network flows per second)*.
.. Optional: To view additional TLS metrics, click *Manage panels* to select and display additional panels, such as *TLS per group (network flows per second)* or *TLS per cipher suite (network flows per second)*.

. Identify secure connections in the *Topology* view:
.. Click the *Topology* tab.
+
Connections secured with TLS are marked with a lock icon. The color of the lock icon indicates the security level:
+
* *Red*: Deprecated TLS versions (1.0 or 1.1)
* *Yellow*: Legacy configurations (TLS 1.2)
* *Green*: Secure connections (TLS 1.3)
* *Blue*: Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC) compliant
+

> Hover over a connection node to view its specific TLS version and cipher suite details.

Reviewer 3: "Hover over" might be an accessibility issue if one is using screen readers,

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * observability/network_observability/monitoring-tls-traffic.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="analyzing-tls-traffic_{context}"]
= Analyze Transport Layer Security traffic data

[role="_abstract"]
View and filter Transport Layer Security (TLS) metadata to identify deprecated configurations and verify encryption compliance in the cluster.

.Prerequisites

* TLS tracking is enabled in the `FlowCollector` custom resource (CR).
* You have access to the {product-title} web console.

.Procedure

> . Navigate to *Observe* -> *Network Traffic* in the {product-title} web console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Navigate to *Observe* -> *Network Traffic* in the {product-title} web console and click the Traffic flows tab.
```

+
[NOTE]
====

> The *TLS Version* column is enabled by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *TLS Version* column is enabled by default. If the TLS version column is not visible by default after enabling TLS tracking, click *Restore default columns* to refresh the table.
```

====

. Add TLS-specific columns to the traffic table:
.. Click *Manage columns*.
.. Select the *TLS Cipher Suite*, *TLS Group*, and *TLS Types* checkboxes.
.. Click *Save*.
+
[NOTE]
====

> If the TLS columns are not visible after enabling TLS tracking, click *Restore default columns* to refresh the list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the default TLS version column is not visible after enabling TLS tracking, click *Restore default columns* to refresh the table.
```

> If the default TLS version column is not visible after enabling TLS tracking, click *Restore default columns* to refresh the table.

Reviewer: Could this note be merged with the one above?

====

. Filter traffic by message type to view complete TLS metadata:
.. In the filter bar, select *TLS Types* and choose *ServerHello* from the dropdown menu.
+
`ServerHello` messages contain negotiated TLS metadata such as cipher suite and cryptographic group information.

. Filter traffic by TLS version to identify deprecated configurations:
.. In the filter bar, select *TLS Version*.
.. Select the versions you want to review:
* *1.0*: Deprecated
* *1.1*: Deprecated
* *1.2*: Legacy
* *1.3*: Current standard
+
To identify all deprecated connections, filter for TLS versions 1.0 and 1.1.

. Analyze TLS metrics in the overview panel:

> .. Scroll to the *Overview* section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Click the *Overview* tab.
```

.. Review the default TLS panels, which include *TLS usage (network flows per second)* and *TLS per version (network flows per second)*.
.. Optional: Click *Manage panels* to select and display additional panels, such as *TLS per group (network flows per second)* or *TLS per cipher suite (network flows per second)*.

. Identify secure connections in the *Topology* view:

> .. Navigate to *Observe* -> *Network Traffic* and click the *Topology* tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Click the *Topology* tab.
```

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * observability/network_observability/monitoring-tls-traffic.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: PROCEDURE
[id="analyzing-tls-traffic_{context}"]
= Analyzing TLS traffic data

[role="_abstract"]
View and filter TLS metadata to identify deprecated configurations and verify encryption compliance in the cluster.

.Prerequisites

* TLS tracking is enabled in the `FlowCollector` custom resource (CR).
* Access to the {product-title} web console.

.Procedure

. Navigate to *Observe* → *Network Traffic* in the {product-title} web console.

> 

Reviewer: Here you can mention TLS Version column is enabled by default
